---
title: "My Local Environment Timeline"
date: 2018-03-20T20:43:00+00:00
draft: false
categories: 

---
<p>The dust has more or less settled now in terms of the tools I use to develop for the web, at least on my own personal machine. I&#8217;m rocking a mid-2012 MacBook Pro, and while it&#8217;s starting to show its age it still powers through thanks to some software options available. I wouldn&#8217;t say it&#8217;s a compromise by any stretch, and sure it would be nice to have that extra oomphf every now and then, but it&#8217;s not a limiting factor for my personal work.</p>
<h2 id="os-and-hardware">OS and Hardware <a class="anchor" href="#os-and-hardware" title="OS and Hardware">#</a></h2>
<p>I&#8217;ve used Windows since I was a young lad, starting with Windows 98SE on a Compaq Presario. I remember playing a lot of <a href="http://www.windowsgames.co.uk/critical.html" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Critical Mass</a> on it, and the sound of firing a missle still rings pretty clear in my mind. Seriously, it&#8217;s a great game. I stuck with Windows from then through college and my first developer job. During my first job I had a bit of developer envy seeing all the tools available on Mac, and the power of the terminal. A lot of StackOverflow responses referred to the terminal, and I got more of a taste for it when I installed Ubuntu on my old laptop. Some hardware didn&#8217;t work correctly with it so I abandoned my attempt at switching OS after a couple of months. Eventually I saved up enough to buy a MacBook, and after a period of adjustment I was <code>rm rf</code>-ing with wreckless abandon. Every developer job I&#8217;ve had since has been almost entirely Mac-based outside of some time on Windows for cross-browser testing. That&#8217;s not to say I wouldn&#8217;t switch back; MacBooks are damn expensive, and when I end up having to shell out for a new machine in the future I might go that route.</p>
<h2 id="software">Software <a class="anchor" href="#software" title="Software">#</a></h2>
<p>College was mostly Netbeans and Eclipse for Java development, and Notepad++ for HTML, CSS and JavaScript. It was in college when I started using Sublime Text and the LAMP stack using tools like XAMPP. I stuck with this setup for years, only swapping XAMPP for MAMP on the Mac. When Atom hit the scene, I immediately switched. A massive community came from seemingly nowhere creating countless plugins. This was a refreshing contrast to Sublime Text which was starting to wane in terms of updates and communication from the developer. I stuck with Atom for a couple of years, before finally returning to Sublime Text due to performance issues. I could run Atom, Chrome and MAMP concurrently, but not much else. </p>
<p>It was during this time I switched to <a href="https://laravel.com/docs/5.6/valet" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Laravel Valet</a> and <a href="https://www.sequelpro.com/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Sequel Pro</a>, and it really gave my machine some breathing room by sparing some resources that were otherwise consumed by MAMP. I still had MAMP on hand for legacy projects that needed Apache and older versions of PHP, but those were slowly updated or phased out. </p>
<p>Later on, Visual Studio Code was starting to make waves, and I was distracted once again. For the most part, it was a really great experience, especially for larger JavaScript projects, but again I was eventually hitting performance issues with a rogue process hogging all my CPU power. After a few months, I once again switched back to Sublime Text.</p>
<h2 id="the-dust-has-settled">The Dust Has Settled <a class="anchor" href="#the-dust-has-settled" title="The Dust Has Settled">#</a></h2>
<p>For now, at least, it has. I feel much more confident in where I&#8217;m at compared to previous setups. In the past while, it&#8217;s the code editor that was always the one being swapped in and out; I always felt like I was trialing something knowing I could come back to Sublime Text. I&#8217;m just as productive as I was (if not more so as I&#8217;m spending less time dealing with performance issues), and I don&#8217;t feel like I&#8217;m missing out using Sublime Text, Laravel Valet, and Sequel Pro.</p>